@node Authors, Copying, Top, Top
@chapter Authors
@cartouche
@unnumbered

The main developing team of this program is composed of:
         
@itemize @bullet
@item Alberto Castro       (alberto.castro@@tddft.org)
@item Angel Rubio          (arubio@@sc.ehu.es)
@item Carlo Andrea Rozzi   (rozzi@@unimo.it)
@item Florian Lorenzen     (lorenzen@@physik.fu-berlin.de)
@item Heiko Appel          (appel@@physik.fu-berlin.de)
@item Micael Oliveira      (micael@@teor.fis.uc.pt)
@item Miguel A. L. Marques (marques@@tddft.org)
@item Xavier Andrade       (andrade@@mirto.polytechnique.fr)
@end itemize

Other contributors are:
@itemize @bullet
@item Sebastien Hamel    - parallel version of oct-excite.
@end itemize

@code{octopus} is based on a fixed-nucleus code written by
George F. Bertsch and K. Yabana to perform real-time dynamics in
clusters (Phys Rev B @strong{54}, 4484 (1996))
and on a condensed matter real-space plane-wave based code written 
by A. Rubio, X. Blase and S.G. Louie 
(Phys. Rev. Lett. @strong{77}, 247 (1996)). 
The code was afterwards extended to handle periodic systems by  
G.F. Bertsch, J.I. Iwata, A. Rubio, and K. Yabana
(Phys. Rev. B, @strong{62}, 7998 (2000)). Contemporaneously there was
a major rewrite of the original cluster code to handle a vast majority 
of finite systems. At this point the cluster code was
named ``tddft''.

This version was consequently enhanced and beautified by A. Castro 
(at the time Ph.D. student of A. Rubio), originating a fairly verbose 15,000 
lines of Fortran 90/77. In the year 2000, M. Marques (aka Hyllios, 
aka Ant@'onio de Faria, cors@'ario portugu@^es), joined the A. Rubio group 
in Valladolid as a postdoc. Having to use ``tddft'' for his work, and being 
petulant enough to think he could structure the code better than his 
predecessors, he started a major rewrite of the code together with A. Castro, 
finishing version 0.2 of ``tddft.'' But things were still not perfect: due to 
their limited experience in Fortran 90, and due to the inadequacy of this 
language for anything beyond a HELLO WORLD program, several parts of the code 
were still clumsy. Also the idea of GPLing the almost 20,000 lines arose 
during an alcoholic evening. So after several weeks of fantic coding and 
after getting rid of the Numerical Recipes code that still lingered around, 
@code{octopus} was born.

The present released version has been completely rewritten and keeps
very little relation to the old version (even input and output files) and has
been enhanced with major new flags to perform various excited-state
dynamics in finite and extended systems (one-dimensional periodic
chains). The code will be updated frequently and new versions can 
be found @uref{http://www.tddft.org/programs/octopus, here}.

The main features of the present version are described in detail in
@emph{octopus: a first principles tool for excited states electron-ion
dynamics}, Comp. Phys. Comm. @strong{151}, 60 (2003).
Updated references as well
as results obtained with octopus will be posted regularly to the @code{octopus}
web page. If you find the code useful for you research we would appreciate
if you give reference to this work and previous ones.

If you have some free time, and if you feel like taking a joy ride with
Fortran 90, just drop us an @email{octopus@@tddft.org, email}. You can
also send us patches, comments, ideas, wishes, etc. They will be included
in new releases of octopus.     

@end cartouche
