@c ********************* INTRODUCTION ***********************************
@node Introduction, Installation, Copying, Top
@chapter Introduction


@ifinfo
[Note to info readers:
The preferred way to read this manual is in its pdf or dvi versions,
since there are quite a few equations that will not print out well
in info format. However, we have tried to make the info format
readable. For this purpose, we have chosen the following convention:
instead of removing the equations in the info files, 
they will show up as the TeX commands that produce them in the printed
documentation]
@end ifinfo


@menu
* Description of octopus::      
* Time dependent density functional theory::  
@end menu




@node  Description of octopus, Time dependent density functional theory, Introduction, Introduction
@section Description of @code{octopus}
     
@code{octopus} @footnote{
@emph{octopus}: Etymology: New Latin @emph{Octopod-}, @emph{Octopus}, 
from Greek @emph{oktOpous}.
Any of a genus (@emph{Octopus}) of cephalopod mollusks that have 
eight muscular arms equipped with two rows of suckers; 
broadly, any octopod excepting the paper nautilus.
Something that resembles an octopus especially in having many 
centrally directed branches.
(Taken from the Merryam-Webster's dictionary.)
}
is a program aimed at the ab initio virtual experimentation on
electron/ion dynamics in external electromagnetic fields of arbitrary
intensity, shape and frequency in  
a hopefully ever increasing range of systems types. Its 
main characteristics are:

@itemize @bullet

@item Electrons are described quantum-mechanically within the
Density-Functional Theory (DFT) for the ground-state whereas the
excitation spectra is computed using time-dependent form (TDDFT)
by performing simulations in time.  

@item The electron-nucleus interaction is described within the
pseudo-potential approximation. Nuclei are described classically
as point particles. 

@item Wave-functions are expanded in a real-space grid. The kinetic
energy operator is computed with a high-order finite difference method.
FFTs are used in part of the calculations.
Time and grid spacing are related by imposing a stable time-evolution.

@item Forces on the ions are computed through the Ehrenfest theorem. 
Extension to quantum mechanical nuclear dynamics is in progress.

@item Allows for spin-polarised calculations as well as 
non-collinear magnetism and spin-orbit effects.

@item Computes photo-electron (energy and angle resolved)
and photo-absorption spectra for different polarised external electromagnetic
fields. Linear response calculations are a simple case of this
general time-evolution procedure (see below).

@item Includes non-linear electronic effects: high-harmonic generation,
interaction with a laser pulse of arbitrary intensity. For the time being
only time- and spatially-dependent electric fields are included, in the future
magnetic fields will be incorporated.

@item Reads different geometry files including protein-data-base (PDB) for
biological calculations (interaction of biomolecules with electromagnetic
fields).

@item It allows for one and two dimesional modes by using for
example the soft-coulomb potential or any other given as input.

@item Laser-pulse optimisation using genetic algorithms (to be done).

@item Utilities to analyse the computed spectra.

@item A very effective and easy-to-use parser to handle the input file.

@end itemize

@node  Time dependent density functional theory,  , Description of octopus, Introduction
@section Time dependent density functional theory

Several reviews of time-dependent density function theory (TDDFT)
and its applications have appeared recently, like the works by 
Gross et al. @footnote{
  Gross, E.K.U., C.A. Ullricht and U.J. Grossmann, 1994, in
  @emph{Density Functional Theory}, (NATOP ASI Series), p.194;
  Gross, E.K.U., F. J. Dobson, and M. Petersilka, 1996, 
  @emph{Density Functional Theory} (Springer, New York).
}, Casida @footnote{
  Casida, M.E., 1995, in @emph{Recent Advances in Density Functional Methods},
  Part I, ed. D.P. Chong (World Scientific, Singapore), p.155;
  Casida, M.E., 1996, in @emph{Recent Developments and Applications of Modern
  Density Functional Theory}, ed. J.M. Seminario (Elsevier Science,
  Amsterdam), p.391
},
Dobson et al, @footnote{
  Dobson, J , G. Vignale and M.P. Das (Eds), 1997a, 
  @emph{Electronic Density Functional Theory: Recent Progress and New Directions}
  (Plenum, New York)  
}
, and Burke et al @footnote{
  Burke, K., M. Petersilka and E.K.U. Gross, 2001, in
  @emph{Recent Advances in Density Functional Methods}, edited by P.
  Fantucci and A. Bencini (World Scientific, Singapure).  
}.

The Hohenberg-Kohn-Sham theory as described is a ground state theory, and
it is hence not meant for the calculation of electronic excitations.
However, one can extend the ideas of static DFT. When one asks for the 
evolution of the system under the influence of a time-dependent external
potential, one should search the extrema of the quantum mechanical
action:


@c This is the way in which equations will be typed hereafter. The 
@c text within the verbatin environment should be the same that the one
@c between $$s. I have tried to simplify this scheme
@c defining a macro, but it did not work properly, due to limitations
@c in the Texinfo macro implementations. I hope that in future versions this
@c will be possible.
@ifnottex
@verbatim
A[\Psi] = \int_{t_0}^{t_1} {\rm d}t
\langle \Psi(t) \vert {\rm i} {\partial \over \partial t} - H(t) \vert
\Psi(t) \rangle,
@end verbatim
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
A[\Psi] = \int_{t_0}^{t_1} {\rm d}t
\langle \Psi(t) \vert {\rm i} {\partial \over \partial t} - H(t) \vert
\Psi(t) \rangle,
$$
@end tex





Theorems have now been established for time-dependent DFT@footnote{
Runge, E. and E. K. U. Gross, 1984, Phys. Rev. Lett. @strong{52} 997.
}
which are parallel to those of static DFT.
The first theorem proves a one-to-one mapping between time-dependent
potentials and time-dependent densities; the second proves the 
stationary-action principle.

The proof of the first theorem is based directly on the evolution of
the time-dependent Schr@"odinger equation from a fixed initial
many-particle state @math{\Psi(t_0)=\Psi_0}
under the influence of a time-dependent potential @math{v(t)}
required to be expandable in a Taylor series around @math{t_0.}
The initial state @math{\Psi_0}
does not need to be the ground state or some other eigenstate of the 
initial potential.  As one does not rely on the adiabatic connection as in standard
zero-temperature many-body perturbation theory the formalism is able to 
handle external perturbations varying fast in time. By virtue of the first 
theorem, the time-dependent density determines the external
potential uniquely up to an additive purely time-dependent function.
On the other hand, the potential determines the time-dependent wave-function,
therefore the expectation value of any quantum mechanical operator
is a unique functional of the density.

The second theorem deals with the variational principle of the action
functional with the initial condition 
@math{\Psi(t_0)=\Psi_0.}
From the previous one-to-one mapping between time-dependent
potentials and densities, the action is a functional of the density
that must have a stationary point at the correct time-dependent
density.
Thus the Euler equation corresponding to the extrema of 
@math{A[\rho],}

@ifnottex
@verbatim
{\delta A[\rho] \over \delta \rho({\bf r},t)} =0,
@end verbatim
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
{\delta A[\rho] \over \delta \rho({\bf r},t)} =0,
$$ 
@end tex

determines the time-dependent density, just
as in the Hohenberg-Kohn formalism the static ground state
density is given by the minimum of the total energy
(@math{\delta E[\rho]/\delta \rho({\bf r})=0}).

Similarly, one can define a time-dependent Kohn-Sham (KS) scheme by
introducing a non-interacting system that reproduces the exact
interacting density @math{\rho({\bf r},t)}.
One gets the following time-dependent KS-equations:

@ifnottex
@verbatim
\left[ - {1 \over 2} \nabla^2 + V_{\rm eff}({\bf r},t)
\right] \psi_i({\bf r},t) = {\rm i}{\partial\over\partial t} \psi_i({\bf
r},t),
@end verbatim
@end ifnottex
@ifnottex
@verbatim
\rho({\bf r},t) = \sum_{i=1}^N \vert \psi_i({\bf r},t) \vert^2
@end verbatim
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\left[ - {1 \over 2} \nabla^2 + V_{\rm eff}({\bf r},t)
\right] \psi_i({\bf r},t) = {\rm i}{\partial\over\partial t} \psi_i({\bf
r},t),
$$
$$
\rho({\bf r},t) = \sum_{i=1}^N \vert \psi_i({\bf r},t) \vert^2
$$
@end tex

where:

@ifnottex
@verbatim
V_{\rm eff}({\bf r},t)= V_{\rm H}({\bf r},t) + V_{\rm xc}({\bf r},t)+
V_{\rm ext}({\bf r},t)
@end verbatim
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
V_{\rm eff}({\bf r},t)= V_{\rm H}({\bf r},t) + V_{\rm xc}({\bf r},t)+
V_{\rm ext}({\bf r},t)
$$
@end tex 

is the effective
time-dependent potential felt by the electrons. It consists of
the sum of the external time-dependent applied field,
the time-dependent Hartree term, plus the  xc potential (defined
through the equivalence between the interacting and fictitious
non-interacting systems). The variational principle yields:
@ifnottex
@verbatim
V_{\rm xc}({\bf r},t) = 
{\delta A_{\rm xc}[\rho] \over \delta \rho({\bf r},t)},
@end verbatim
@end ifnottex
@tex 
$$
V_{\rm xc}({\bf r},t) = 
{\delta A_{\rm xc}[\rho] \over \delta \rho({\bf r},t)},
$$ 
@end tex

where @math{A_{\rm xc}[\rho]}
is the xc part of the action functional.

The main advantage of the time-dependent KS scheme lies in its
computational simplicity compared to other quantum-chemical models 
such as time-dependent Hartree-Fock or configuration interaction.
