o=head1 NAME

oct-run_regression_test.pl - Script to create and run B<octopus> regression tests

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item B<oct-run_regression_test.pl> [ option ]... [ file ]... 

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This script is one of the B<octopus> utilities. 

This script can be used to generate and run the B<octopus> regression tests.

The man pages of Octopus and of the auxiliary Octopus
sub-programs (oct-something) are not intended to contain the
documentation of the programs, but only their basic
description. For where to find more documentation, see the
L<SEE ALSO> section below.

=over

=item B<-n>

Dry run. Don't run the test. Only print what would be executed.

=item B<-v>

Run in verbose mode. Useful for debugging the script.

=item B<-h>

Show a brief summary of command-line options.

=item B<-D> I<DIR>

Directory where to look for the Octopus executables.

=item B<-s> I<SUFFIX>

Suffix to append to the base executable name.

=item B<-c> I<file>

Create a template for a Octopus regression test. This should always be used if you
create a new regression test.

=item B<-f> I<file>

This option specifies the input file for a regression test.

=item B<-i>

Print content of the Octopus input file which is used for the current test to stdout.

=item B<-p>

Preserve working directory. Don't clean up the temporary working directory after the run.

=item B<-l>

Copy outout log to current working directory.

=item B<-m>

Run matches only (assumes there are work directories present).

=back 

=head1 EXAMPLES

To create a template for a regression test run, e.g.

	oct-run_regression_test.pl -c finite_systems_3d/sodium.test

Running a test can be achieved with

	oct-run_regression_test.pl -f finite_systems_3d/sodium.test

If a test run fails it might be useful for bug-tracing to preserve the working directory
of this run and to print out the input file

 	oct-run_regression_test.pl -pi -f finite_systems_3d/sodium.test

Run an MPI test with a local directory as working directory

	oct-run_regression_test.pl -f benzene.test -D $PWD/../src -s _mpi

=head1 AUTHOR

Written by H. Appel.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Report bugs to <appel@physik.fu-berlin.de>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2005 H. Appel.

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There
is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The largest source of documentation is the Octopus
wiki: S<http://www.tddft.org/programs/octopus/wiki/>.
