=head1 NAME

oct-vibrational - Calculates the vibrational spectrum from a molecular-dynamics run. 

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item B<oct-vibrational>

=back

[oct-vibrational does not read the standard input: all standard
input will be simply ignored. An input file named F<inp> must be
present in the running directory.  Also, oct-vibrational accepts
no command-line arguments, since there is not a standard way to do
this with Fortran 90.]


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is one of the B<octopus> utilities.

It computes a vibrational spectrum from a molecular-dynamics run, either by analyzing just the atomic motions, or also by considering the dipole moment to get an infrared spectrum.

The man pages of octopus and of the auxiliary octopus
sub-programs (oct-something) are not intended to contain the
documentation of the programs, but only their basic
description. For where to find more documentation, see the
L<SEE ALSO> section below.


=head1 AUTHOR

Written by M. A. L. Marques, A. Castro, A. Rubio, C. A. Rozzi, F. Lorenzen, H. Appel and X. Andrade.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Report bugs through the <octopus-users@tddft.org> mailing list.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2006 M. A. L. Marques, A. Castro, A. Rubio, C. A. Rozzi, F. Lorenzen, H. Appel and X. Andrade.

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The largest source of documentation is the octopus wiki: S<http://www.tddft.org/programs/octopus/wiki/>.

At the usual standard locations, you will also find an info file, F<octopus.info>.

