=head1 NAME

oct-run_periodic_table - run octopus for atoms

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item B<oct-run_periodic_table> [ option ]...

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This script is one of the B<octopus> utilities. 

Simple script to run octopus for all atoms in the periodic table for
which pseudopotentials are available.

=over

=item B<-h> 

Show this message.

=item B<-n>

Run in dry-run mode (show what would be executed).

=item B<-s> species

Run octopus for given species.

=item B<-a>

Run octopus for all atoms.

=item B<-r>

Do a restart, i.e. do not use fromScratch=yes.

=item B<-t> temperature

Run with electronic temperature.

=item B<-e> no_states

Use extra states.

=item B<-x> octopus_executable

=item B<-d> defaults_file_for_pseudopotentials

=back

The man pages of octopus and of the auxiliary octopus
sub-programs (oct-something) are not intended to contain the
documentation of the programs, but only their basic
description. For where to find more documentation, see the
L<SEE ALSO> section below.

=head1 EXAMPLES

The following command would run the octopus executable to
calculate the He atom.

prompt> B<oct-run_periodic_table> -s He -x octopus


=head1 AUTHOR

Written by H. Appel.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Report bugs to <appel@physik.fu-berlin.de>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2005 H. Appel.

This  is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The largest source of documentation is the octopus wiki: S<http://www.tddft.org/programs/octopus/wiki/>.


