ema=head1 NAME

oct-run_testsuite - Script to run the B<octopus> testsuite.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item B<oct-run_testsuite> [option]...

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This script is one of the B<octopus> utilities.

This script runs the Octopus testsuite.

The man pages of Octopus and of the auxiliary Octopus
sub-programs (oct-something) are not intended to contain the
documentation of the programs, but only their basic
description. For where to find more documentation, see the
L<SEE ALSO> section below.

=over

=item B<-h> 

Prints out a short help message.

=item B<-n>

Run in dry mode (show what would be executed).

=item B<-g> I<LIST>

Comma-separated list of test groups to run. If not present, all tests
are run.

=item B<-q>

Query testfiles belonging to groups given with B<-g> option. No tests
are performed.

=item B<-d> I<DIR>

Directory where to look for the testsuite.

=item B<-l>

Local run.

=item B<-e> I<SUFFIX>

Suffix to append to the Octopus executable file name.

=item B<-p> I<PREFIX>

Installation prefix [default: /usr].

=item B<-w>

Run without MPI (parallel) tests.

=item B<-c>

Clean up all .log files after the testuite run.

=item B<-m> I<ADDRESS>

Mail report to address.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Written by H. Appel.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Report bugs to <appel@physik.fu-berlin.de>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2005 H. Appel.

This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There
is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The largest source of documentation is the Octopus
wiki: S<http://www.tddft.org/programs/octopus/wiki/>.
