=head1 NAME

oct-display_partitions - Graphical representation of the mesh partitions.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item B<oct-display_partitions>

=back

[oct-display_partitions does not read the standard input: all standard input will be simply ignored. Also, oct-display_partitions accepts no command line arguments.]


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is one of the B<octopus> utilities. 

It is a script to use gnuplot to plot the partitioning of the
mesh. The files mesh_partition.XXX as produced in debug/mesh_partition
by the octopus debug mode have to be present in the current working
directory when this script is invoked. The plot can be found in the
file mesh_partitions.png. This script generates a gnuplot-script
called mesh_partitions_index.gp which is stored in the current working
directory and can be loaded into gnuplot manually. With:

gnuplot> load mesh_partitions_index.gp

gnuplot> set term x11

gnuplot> replot

the plot can be reproduced and shown on the screen so that
rotating and zooming is possible.

The man pages of octopus and of the auxiliary octopus
sub-programs (oct-something) are not intended to contain the
documentation of the programs, but only their basic
description. For where to find more documentation, see the
L<SEE ALSO> section below.


=head1 AUTHOR

Written by H. Appel.

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Report bugs through the <octopus-users@tddft.org> mailing list.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2005 H. Appel.

This  is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The largest source of documentation is the octopus wiki: S<http://www.tddft.org/programs/octopus/wiki/>.

