\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*- 
@c %**start of header
@setfilename octopus-faq.info 
@settitle @code{octopus} faq
@c %**end of header


@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* octopus-faq: (octopus).           The octopus program FAQ.
@end direntry

@c ***************SUMMARY DESCRIPTION AND COPYRIGTH**********************
@ifinfo
The purpose of this info file is compiling a series of FAQ related to
the octopus program.

Copyright 2002 M. A. L. Marques, Alberto Castro and Angel Rubio

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.
     
@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the section
entitled ``Copying''
is included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.

@end ifinfo

@c ***************TITLE PAGE AND COPYRIGHT*******************************
@titlepage

@title @code{octopus} FAQ
@subtitle Electronic Structure
@subtitle Molecular Dynamics
@subtitle Excited-State Dynamics
@subtitle Recipes-Generator
@subtitle March 2002
@sp 4
@c @center Male Hapalochlaena lunulata (top),
@c @center and female Hapalochlaena lunulata (bottom).
@c @center Photograph by Roy Caldwell.

@sp 2
@author By Miguel A. L. Marques, Alberto Castro and Angel Rubio
at the Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC)

San Sebasti@'an/Donostia, Spain

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 M. A. L. Marques, Alberto Castro and Angel Rubio
@vskip 24pt
This program, along with its documentation, is free software;
you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU
General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation;
either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
@vskip 24pt
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.
     
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the section
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.
     
Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@c **********************************************************************
@iftex
@headings off
@c @evenheading @thispage{}            @| @thistitle @|
@c @oddheading                         @| @thischapter  @| @thispage{} 
@evenheading @thispage{}            @| @thistitle @|
@oddheading  @| @thischapter  @| @thispage{} 
@end iftex



@c ***************TOP NODE AND MASTER MENU*******************************
@ifnottex
@node Top, Units, (dir), (dir)
@top octopus
@c The purpose of this info file is describing how to use
@c the octopus program. This is obvious, I know, but texinfo manual
@c encourages to put something over here.
@end ifnottex

@c @ifhtml
@c @center Male Hapalochlaena lunulata (top),
@c @center and female Hapalochlaena lunulata (bottom).
@c @center Photograph by Roy Caldwell.
@c @end ifhtml

@menu
* Units::                       

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Units

* What are these @emph{atomic units}?::  
* What are these @emph{convenient units}?::  
* How do I set a laser pulse of x W/cm2 of intensity?::  

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@c ***************THE BODY OF THE DOCUMENT*******************************

@c ***************UNITS**************************************************
@node Units,  , Top, Top
@chapter Units

@menu
* What are these @emph{atomic units}?::  
* What are these @emph{convenient units}?::  
* How do I set a laser pulse of x W/cm2 of intensity?::  
@end menu

@node What are these @emph{atomic units}?, What are these @emph{convenient units}?, Units, Units
@section What are these @emph{atomic units}?

Atomic units are a Gaussian system of units (by ``Gaussian'' I mean that the
vacuum dielectric constant has no dimensions and is set to be
@math{\epsilon_0 = {1 \over {4\pi}}}),
in which the numerical values of the Bohr radius, the electronic
charge, the electronic mass, and the reduced Planck's constant are set to one:

@ifnottex
a0 = 1; e^2 = 1; m_e = 1; \hbar = 1.   (1)
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\eqalignno{a_0 &= 1;\> e^2 = 1;\> m_e = 1;\>\hbar = 1.&(1)\cr}
$$
@end tex

This simplifies formulae.@footnote{
Although, in my opinion, it seriously hazards dimensionality analysis,
formulae interpretation and understanding, and Physics in general.
But this is just a personal taste.
} This sets directly two fundamental units: the atomic
units of length and of mass:

@ifnottex
au[length] = a0 = 5.2917721*10^(-11) m,   (2a)

au[mass] = m_e = 9.1093819*10^(-31) kg.   (2b)
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\eqalignno{
{\rm au}_{\rm length} &= a_0 = 5.2917721\times 10^{-11}~{\rm m};\quad 
{\rm au}_{\rm mass} = m_e = 9.1093819\times 10^{-31}~{\rm kg}.&(2)\cr}
$$
@end tex
Since the squared charge must have units of energy times length, we can thus
set the atomic unit of energy:

@ifnottex
au[energy] = e^2/a0 = 4.3597438*10^(-18) J,   (3)
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\eqalignno{
{\rm au}_{\rm energy} &= {e^2 \over a_0} = 4.3597438\times 10^{-18}~{\rm J},&(3)\cr}
$$
@end tex
which it is called Hartree, Ha. And, since the energy has units of mass times
length squared per time squared, this help us get the atomic unit of time:

@ifnottex
Ha = m_e a0^2/au[time]^2 => au[time] = \hbar/Ha = \hbar a0/e^2.   (4)
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\eqalignno{
{\rm Ha} &= m_e { a_0^2 \over {\rm} {\rm au}_{\rm time}^2} \to 
{\rm au}_{\rm time} = a_0 \sqrt{m_e \over {\rm Ha}} = {a_0 \over e} \sqrt{m_e a_0}
= 2.4188843\times 10^{-17}~{\rm s}.&(4)\cr}
$$
@end tex

Now the catch is: what about Planck's constant? Its dimensions are of energy
times time, and thus we should be able to derive its value by now. But at the
beginning we set it to one! The point is that from the four physics constants
used (@math{a_0, m_e, e^2, \hbar}) are not independent, since:

@ifnottex
a_0 = \hbar^2/(m_e e^2/[4\pi\epsilon_0]).   (5)
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\eqalignno{
a_0 &=  { \hbar^2 \over {m_e \; {e^2 \over {4 \pi \epsilon_0} } } }.&(5)\cr}
$$
@end tex

In this way, we could actually have derived the atomic unit of time in an
easier way, using Planck's constant:

@ifnottex
 \hbar = 1 Ha au[time] => au[time] = \hbar/Ha = \hbar a0/e^2.   (6)
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
\eqalignno{
\hbar &= 1\; {\rm Ha}\,{\rm au}_{\rm time} \Rightarrow {\rm au}_{\rm time} 
      = { \hbar \over {\rm Ha}} = 
{ {\hbar a_0} \over e^2}.&(6)\cr}
$$
@end tex

And combining (6) and (5) we retrieve (4).


@node What are these @emph{convenient units}?, How do I set a laser pulse of x W/cm2 of intensity?, What are these @emph{atomic units}?, Units
@section What are these @emph{convenient units}?

A lot of the literature in this field is written using @AA{}ngstr@"oms and electron-volts
as the units of length and of energy, respectively. So it may be ``convenient''
to define a system of units, derived from the atomic system of units, in which
we make that substitution. And so we will call it ``convenient''.

The unit mass remains the same, and thus the unit of time must change, being
now @math{\hbar /{\rm eV}},
with @math{\hbar = 6.582\,1220(20)\times 10^{-16}~\rm eV\,s}.

@node How do I set a laser pulse of x W/cm2 of intensity?,  , What are these @emph{convenient units}?, Units
@section How do I set a laser pulse of x W/cm2 of intensity?


The relation between the peak intensity, @math{I_0},
and the peak electric field, @math{E_0,}
is given by

@ifnottex
 I0 = 1/2 c epsilon0 E0^2.
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$
I_0 = {\textstyle{1 \over 2}} \; c \; \epsilon_0 \; E_0^2.
$$
@end tex

That is, in a Gaussian system of units
(@math{\epsilon_0 = {{1} \over {4\pi}}}), we have
@math{E_0 = \sqrt{ {{8\pi} \over {c}} \; I_0 }}.

The amplitude of the laser field is specified in the input file through
a numerical value @math{x}
in the lasers block. The question is thus how to relate this value to watts per
squared centimeter. The two formulae that produce this task are:

@itemize
@item If atomics units are used in the input file:
@math{I_{0} = 3.5094\times 10^{16}\,x^2\rm~W/cm^2}

@item If convenient units are used in the input file:
@math{I_{0} = 1.3272\times 10^{13}\,x^2\rm~W/cm^2}
@end itemize

These formulae may be derived from previous equation and a bit of units handling. It is 
important to note that the amplitude introduced in the input file does not correspond to the
electric field amplitude @math{E}, but to the corresponding force,
@math{e\,E}.
This is numerically irrelevant in the case of atomic units, but it is important to derive the
expression for convenient units. In this case, one should just note that
@math{e^2 = 14.399644\rm~eV\,\AA}.

@contents

@bye
@c **********************************************************************
